---
layout: post
title: "The Story of Circe"
date: 2020-06-02
keywords: [Book Character, Circe, Mythological Fantasy]
excerpt: This post provides a summary of the book 'Circe', delving into the life of a lesser goddess as she comes to terms with her immortality and embarks on a quest to discover her true purpose. Exploring Circe's character has been a profoundly enriching experience, with each stage revealing new layers of her personality and surprising me along the way. Her unwavering courage and determination shine through as she fearlessly navigates the challenges in her path, fiercely protecting what is dear to her heart. Circe may not be the most beautiful, powerful, or wise by divine standards, but her journey shows that she is much more than those traits – she is uniquely herself, and that is all she needs to be.
---
 
Growing up among the greatest gods and goddesses, Circe spent her childhood looking up to her father, Helios, the Sun. With no particular talents to distinguish her, Circe lived in the shadows of her, more talented, siblings. She endeavored to spend as much time as possible at Helios' feet, longing for his love. Yet, for a great Titan god like Helios, even the purest love from his own kin is still superfluous. 
 
The first time Circe acted against expectations was when she showed a small act of kindness to Prometheus. She struggled to understand how Prometheus could willingly accept Zeus' punishment for the sake of mortals, or why Zeus, the mightiest of all gods, would inflict such cruelty on his own kind. This incident opened her eyes to the undercurrents of darkness in her world, a world that, to any human, would appear to be the brightest of all with the presence of Helios the Sun. 

Circe willingly assumed the role of caregiver for her youngest brother, Aeetes. She nurtured him with all the love and affection she could offer. Aeetes reciprocated her love in the way a god would, fully aware that deities like themselves were expected to be solitary and self-reliant, fortified by their wisdom and power. In their divine realm, there was little room for vulnerability and tenderness.
 
In her loneliness, despite being immortal, Circe sought companionship among humans. Her encounter with Glaucos sparked an innocent yet impulsive love, leading her to experiment with witchcraft for the first time in an attempt to bind him to her by transforming him into a deity. This decision, driven by a profound desire for love and connection, soon led to heartbreak as she witnessed his cruelty and vanity. It's hard to fault Circe for succumbing to such feelings in her desperate quest for affection. However, her actions, particularly the transformation of Scylla into a monstrous being, cast a dark shadow on her life, a regret she later strove to rectify. This chapter in her life, far from a fairy tale and marked by imperfections, set Circe on her crucial journey of self-discovery.
 
Aeetes, with careful consideration and a sense of strategy, unveiled to Circe her fate as a pharmakis, a practitioner of witchcraft. His understanding of the intricate power dynamics among the gods far surpassed Circe's own knowledge at the time. However, to Circe, Aeetes was like an unreachable column of water - aloof, self-sufficient, and detached. 
 
Circe bid farewell to the family that never truly felt like her own and the lifestyle of the facade. As she arrived on the island of Aiaia, she embarked on a journey of self-reliance, learning skills to forge her own path. Her realization, "All this while, I have been a weaver without wool, a ship without the sea. Yet now look where I sail," reflects her newfound purpose and direction. In the solitude and barrenness of the deserted island, she discovered a sense of liberty that had eluded her amidst the gods.

Circe dedicated herself to perfecting her sorcery skills. Ironically, the drudgery required to master witchcraft brought her a sense of solace. Enduring centuries of isolation and monotony, she was undeterred by the arduous journey to bend the world to her will. In stark contrast to the gods who were born with immense powers, Circe had to earn her place through efforts and tenacity. Bringing withered flowers back to life, producing cherry blossoms out of season, transforming roses into irises, taming her lioness, she was finally liberated by knowing what she was capable of.

Circe maintained a tenuous link to the outside world through Hermes, a connection that persisted until a ship approached her island for the first time since her exile. On her way to visit her sister in the Kingdom of Crete, she confronted Scylla with a profound remorse for the lives lost due to her vain delusion. Her sister presented her with an unimaginable request: to assist in the birth of the Minotaur,  a half-god half-bull creature. This experience, particularly the demand placed upon her in Crete, extinguished any remaining hope Circe harbored for affection from her dysfunctional family. It became clear to her that power overshadows everything else in her family.
 
In the midst of turmoil, Circe formed a bond with Daedalus, a virtuous and skillful mortal. Together, they confronted challenges such as escaping Scylla and subduing the Minotaur. Amid these trials, they shared moments of warmth and affection, albeit briefly. Circe recognized that Daedalus was not hers to claim, reflecting that, "But in solitary life, there are rare moments when another soul dips near yours, as stars once a year brush the earth. Such a constellation was he to me."

Circe's initial interaction with Odysseus was fraught with tension. Having seen the worst in mortals, she had transformed many into pigs and intended to do the same to Odysseus' men. However, Odysseus proved to be an exception. His charisma and wisdom, coupled with his awareness of Circe's lineage as the daughter of Helios, set him apart from others she had encountered.

Both Circe and Odysseus were well-acquainted with the harsh realities of their world, an understanding that led them to approach life cautiously. As downhearted and lonely as Circe was, she had found strength and identity in her powers as a witch. On the other hand, Odysseus, having fought alongside the gods on the battlefields of Troy for a decade, had witnessed the brutal truths of war and engaged in his fair share of dishonorable deeds. He was exhausted when he landed on Circe’s island. Circe saw something torn that she could mend. Thus, she became a safe harbor for him.
 
Circe's love for him was careful and measured. She engaged him with small requests to gauge his character, absorbed his stories to better understand him, and observed his troubled dreams of returning to battle. A man of war and valor, Odysseus, wasn't truly meant for a life with Circe. As he departed and turned for a final look from his ship, Circe was absent from the shore, feeling an inner emptiness. Yet, she refused to show her vulnerability. That had always been their unspoken pact: “he showed me his scars, and in return, he let me pretend that I had none.”
 
Shortly after Odysseus left, Circe discovered she was pregnant with his child. The prospect of motherhood filled her with a profound sense of hope; she now had something truly her own, rich with depth and purpose. Circe embraced motherhood with a warrior's resolve. However, Telegonus, her son, proved to be exceptionally challenging, rarely giving her a moment's peace with his intense hatred and frequent outbursts of rage. Just as Telegonus began to show signs of calming, Athena emerged, threatening his life to avert a prophecy. Circe tirelessly devoted herself to crafting protective spells for Telegonus, all while managing his relentless tantrums.
 
Telegonus, nurtured in a protective and indulgent environment, matured into a brave and morally upright young man, imbued with idealism. Holding profound respect for Odysseus, his father, he longed to journey to Ithaca to reunite with him. Eager to explore beyond the confines of Aiaia and carve out his own destiny, Telegonus was resolute. Despite her deep concerns, Circe assisted in preparing him for the voyage, even enduring significant pain to procure Trygon's tails for his safeguarding. Tragically, fulfilling the prophecy, it was the venom from Trygon’s tail that ultimately caused Odysseus's death. Telegonus returned to the island burdened with immense sorrow. Unexpectedly, Odysseus’s wife, Penelope, and son, Telemachus, also made their way to Aiaia.

Penelope and Telemachus arrived, bearing with them the remaining chapters of Odysseus's saga, which they shared with Circe. Penelope recounted her tale of an arranged marriage and the challenging task of fending off hordes of suitors during Odysseus's prolonged absence. Telemachus, on the other hand, spoke of his own story—a journey marked by his unwavering commitment to righteousness, his rejection of the throne offered by Athena, and his choice to embrace a life of anonymity, content to be a nameless figure in history. In stark contrast, Telegonus embraced a different destin prophesied by Zeus that beckoned him to forge a new empire in the West. The time had finally come for Circe to give her son to the world. 
 
Throughout her journey, the longing for love had persisted. As powerful and resilient as a goddess could be, the prospect of an eternity without love weighed heavily on her. Circe was a creature of boundless love, sharing it selflessly with those who had shown her kindness. However, she had now reached a point in her immortal life where she needed to discover a different kind of love—a love that emanated from within, independent of her family, her lover, and her son. In the countless millennia that lay ahead, all beings would eventually be lost to the sands of time, leaving only the immortal Olympians and Titans behind. Yet, the realm of the gods was a domain ruled by the powerful and the ruthless, and Circe had never truly felt that she belonged there.
 
Circe had finally reached a point of transformation. She initiated negotiations with her father to bring an end to her long exile. Drawing upon Trygon's power, she put an end to where it all began: Scylla was turned into stone, and no more innocent lives would be lost. She then cast her very last spell, one meant solely for herself: she willingly relinquished her divinity and embraced mortality. Telemachus stood by her side throughout this pivotal journey. He treasured Circe with unearthly patience. It was straightforward to him: “If you want it, I will do it. If it would make you happy, I will go with you”. Reborn as a mortal, Circe was now prepared to embrace life fully: to love, to experience pain, and to hold every moment of her limited lifespan dearly. 
